Microsoft Edge 149 web platform release notes (Jun. 2026) (#3786)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/web-platform/release-notes/149.md

Author: create toc entry

Author: in 147.md & 148.md see if can link to specific devtools page and wv2 page.

#### Proofreader API

Expires on May 19, 2026.

The Proofreader API corrects grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors in text.

The Proofreader API uses a small language model (SLM) that's built into Microsoft Edge, from your website's JavaScript code, or from your browser extension's JavaScript code.

See also [Correct grammar and spelling with the Proofreader API](../proofreader-api.md).

* [Explainer](https://github.com/webmachinelearning/proofreader-api/blob/main/README.md)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/webmachinelearning/proofreader-api/issues)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/03b14cb6-3ac8-4049-8bf1-b293109f1d05)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Prompt API

Expires on Jun. 16, 2026

Use the Prompt API to prompt a small language model (SLM) that's built into Microsoft Edge, from your website's JavaScript code, or from your browser extension's JavaScript code.

The Prompt API is an experimental web API.

Use the Prompt API to:
* Generate and analyze text.
* Create application logic based on user input.
* Discover innovative ways to integrate prompt-engineering capabilities into your web app.

See also:

> * [Prompt a built-in language model with the Prompt API](../prompt-api.md).

Author: ```suggestion
* [Prompt a built-in language model with the Prompt API](../prompt-api.md)
```
or, keep period, concat into a sent. like previous See Also

Author: See also [Prompt a built-in language model with the Prompt API] ( ../prompt-api.md ).

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### `<usermedia>` HTML element

Expires on Jul. 14, 2026.

The `<usermedia>` HTML element is a browser-controlled element for requesting camera or microphone access.

Using a semantic HTML element instead of JavaScript:
* Provides better clarity to users about the permission request.
* Improves accessibility.
* Prevents manipulative UI patterns.
* Streamlines the workflow, by directly providing the media stream to your application.  This eliminates the need for separate API calls.

Information about this origin trial:
* [Explainer](https://github.com/WICG/PEPC/blob/main/usermedia_element.md)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/WICG/PEPC/issues/62#issuecomment-3210807676)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/ff216fe5-9eb9-4acb-aace-2f6a8789b95c)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Soft navigation heuristics

Expires on Jul. 28, 2026.

A _soft navigation_ is a same-document navigation that's driven by JavaScript, when using the History API or the Navigation API.

Soft navigations are triggered by a user gesture.  A soft navigation modifies the DOM and the displayed URL.

> This origin trial exposes soft-navigation heuristics so that you can collect performance metrics for navigations in a single-page app.

Author: ```suggestion
This origin trial exposes soft-navigation heuristics so that you can collect performance metrics for navigations in a single-page app.

A _soft navigation_ is a same-document navigation that's driven by JavaScript, when using the History API or the Navigation API.  Soft navigations are triggered by a user gesture.  A soft navigation modifies the DOM and the displayed URL.
```
re-seq to start w/ final para
concat background intro info

per Prototype PR:
Soft navigation heuristics
Exposes soft-navigation heuristics so that you can collect performance metrics for navigations in a single-page app.  A _soft navigation_ is a same-document navigation that's driven by JavaScript, when using the History API or the Navigation API.  Soft navigations are triggered by a user gesture.  A soft navigation modifies the DOM and the displayed URL.  
* [Register] ( https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/ec952482-49f0-4980-a451-13ea3f9a7220 )

* [Explainer](https://github.com/explainers-by-googlers/script-src-v2)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/explainers-by-googlers/script-src-v2/issues)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/6bd50a0d-6f30-425f-beba-034be41bb013)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Web Install API

Expires on Aug. 25, 2026.

The Web Install API allows a website to install another website as a web app on the user's device, by using `navigator.install()`.

* [Explainer](https://aka.ms/webinstall)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/issues/new?template=web-install-api.md)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/bcf7d28f-6bdf-45d8-9207-63c97a042407)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### HTML in canvas

Expires on Aug. 25, 2026.

HTML in canvas enables customizing the rendering of HTML using canvas with three new primitives:

* The `layoutsubtree` attribute to opt-in canvas elements.
* Methods to draw child elements: `drawElementImage` for 2D, `texElementImage2D` for WebGL, and `copyElementImageToTexture` for WebGPU.
* The `paint` event that fires to handle updates.

> * [Explainer](https://github.com/WICG/html-in-canvas)

Author: ```suggestion
Information about this origin trial:
* [Explainer](https://github.com/WICG/html-in-canvas)
```

* [Explainer](https://github.com/WICG/container-timing/blob/main/ORIGIN_TRIAL.md)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/WICG/container-timing/issues)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/79fd2cd8-2283-4ed8-a472-4a8281a73d86)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Separate style and layout durations in the Long Animation Frame API

Expires on Oct. 6, 2026.

This origin trial adds the following properties to the Long Animation Frame API:
* `styleDuration`
* `forcedStyleDuration`
* `layoutDuration`
* `forcedLayoutDuration`

Use these properties to distinguish style and layout times, to gain a deeper understanding of CSS performance issues for each aspect of layout.

* [Explainer](https://github.com/w3c/long-animation-frames/pull/30#issue-3828859369)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/w3c/long-animation-frames/pull/30)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/349e23d8-799a-4ac2-b45a-ffb91e09b4ce)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->

> #### HTML Install Element

Author: ```suggestion
#### HTML `<install>` Element
```
also in local toc

Author: HTML `<install>` element

* [Feedback](https://github.com/WebAssembly/custom-descriptors/issues)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/f1227421-7d96-4380-b588-cbe9806aa7a3)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### `<usermedia>` HTML element

Expires on Jul. 14, 2026.

The `<usermedia>` HTML element is a browser-controlled element for requesting camera or microphone access.

Using a semantic HTML element instead of JavaScript:
* Provides better clarity to users about the permission request.
* Improves accessibility.
* Prevents manipulative UI patterns.
* Streamlines the workflow, by directly providing the media stream to your application.  This eliminates the need for separate API calls.

Information about this origin trial:
* [Explainer](https://github.com/WICG/PEPC/blob/main/usermedia_element.md)
* [Feedback](https://github.com/WICG/PEPC/issues/62#issuecomment-3210807676)
* [Register](https://developer.microsoft.com/microsoft-edge/origin-trials/trials/ff216fe5-9eb9-4acb-aace-2f6a8789b95c)

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Soft navigation heuristics

Expires on Jul. 28, 2026.

> Soft navigations are same-document navigations that are driven by JavaScript, when using the History API or the Navigation API.

Author: ```suggestion
A _soft navigation_ is a same-document navigation that's driven by JavaScript, when using the History API or the Navigation API.
```

Soft navigations are triggered by a user gesture.  A soft navigation modifies the DOM and the displayed URL.

> This origin trial exposes soft navigation heuristics so that you can collect performance metrics for navigations in a single-page app.

Author: ```suggestion
This origin trial exposes soft-navigation heuristics so that you can collect performance metrics for navigations in a single-page app.
```
adj. phrase, hyphen

---

> title: Microsoft Edge 149 web platform release notes (Jun 2026)

Author: ```suggestion
title: Microsoft Edge 149 web platform release notes (Jun. 2026)
```
3x at top of file
